AFRICA
---

>　The public first met Elon Reeve musk in 1984. The south African trade publication PC and Office Technology published the source code to a video game Musk had designed. Called Blastar, the science-fiction-inspired space game required 167 lines of instructions to run. This was back in the day when early conmputer users were required to type out commands to make their machines do much of anything. In that context, Musk's game did not shine as a marvel of computer science but it certainly surpassed what most tewlve-year-olds were kicking out at the time. Its coverage in the magazine netted Musk five hundred dollars and provided some early hints about his character. The Blastear spread on page 69 of the magazine shows that the young man wanted to go by the sci-fi-author-sounding name E.R. Musk and that he already had visions of grand conquests dancing in his head. The brief explainer states, "In this game you have to destroy an alien space freighter, which is carrrying deadly Hydrogen Bombs and Status Beam Machines. This game makes good use of sprites and animation, and in this sense makes the listing worth reading." (As of this writing, not even the Internet knows what "status beam machines" are.)
>
>　A boy fantasizing about space and battles between good and evil is anything but amazing. A boy who takes these fantasies seriously is more remarkable. Such was the case with the young Elon Musk. By the middle of his teenage years, Musk had blended fantasy and reality to the point that they were had to separate in his mind. Musk came to see man's fate in the universe as a personal obligation. If that meant pursuing cleaner energy technology or building spaceships to extend the human species's reach, then so be it. Musk would find a way to make these things happen. "Maybe I read too many comics as a kid," Musk said. "In the comics, it always seems like they are trying to save the world. It seemed like one should try to make the world a better place because the inverse makes no sense."
>
>　At around age fourteen, Musk had a full-on existential crisis. He tried to deal with it like many gifted adolescents do, turning to religious and philosophical texts. Musk sampled a handful of ideologies and then ended up more or less back where he had started, embracing the sci-fi lessons found in one of the most influential books in his life: The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy, by Douglas Adams. "He points out that one of the really tough things is figuring out what questions to ask," Musk said. ”Once you figure out the question, then the answer is relatively easy. I came to the conclusion that really we should aspire to increase the scope and scale of human consciousness in order to better understand what questions to ask." The teengage Musk then arrived at his ultralogical mission statement. "The only thing that makes sense to do is strive for greater collective enlightenment," he said.
>
>　It's easy enough to spot some of the underpinnings of Musk's search for purpose. Born in 1971, he grew up in Pretoria, a large city in the northeastern part of South Africa, just an hour's drive from Johannesburg. The specter of apartheid was present throughout his childhood, as South Africa frequently boiled over with tension and violence. Blacks and whites clashed, as did blacks of different tribes. Musk turned four years old just days after the Soweto Uprising, in which hundreds of black students died while protesting decrees of the white government. For years South Africa faced sanctions imposed by other nations due to its racist policies. Musk had the luxury of traveling abroad during his chilhood and would have gotten a flavor for how outsiders viewed South Africa.
>
>　But what had even more of an impact on Musk's personality was the white Afrikaner culture so prevalent in Pretoria and the surrounding areas. Hypermasculine behavior was celebrated and tough jocks were revered. While Musk enjoyed a level of privilege, he lived as an outsider whose reserved personality and geeky inclinations run against the prevailing attitudes of the time. His notion that something about the world had gone awry received constant reinforcement, and Musk, almost from his earliest days, plotted an escape from his surroundings and dreamed of a place that would allow his personality and dreams to flourish. He saw America in its most cliched form, as the land of opporutnity and the most likely stage for making the realization of his dreams possible. This is how it came to pass that a lonesome, gawky South African boy who talked with the utmost sincerity about pursuing "collective enlightenment" ended up a America's most adventurous industrialist.
>
>　When Musk did finally reach the United States in his twenties, it marked a return to his ancestral roots. Family trees suggest that ancestors bearing the Swiss German surname of Haldeman on the maternal side of Musk's family left Europe for New York during the Revolutionary War. From New York, they spread out to the prairies of the Midwest - Illinois and Minnesota, in particular. "We had people that fought on both sides of the Civil War apparently and were a family of farmers," said Scott Haldeman, Musk's uncle and the unofficial family historian.
>
>　Throughout his childhood, boys teased Musk because of his unusual name. He earned the first part of it from his great-grandfather John Elon Haldeman, who was born in 1872 and grew up in Illinois before heading to Minnesota. There he would meet his wife, Almeda Jane Norman, who was five years younger. By 1902, the couple had settled down in a log cabin in the central Minnesota town of Pequot and given birth to their son Joshua Norman Haldeman, Musk's grandfather. He would grow up to become an eccentric and exceptional man and a model for Musk.
>
>　Joshua Norman Haldeman is described as an athletic, self-reliant boy. In 1907, his family moved to the prairies of Saskatchewan, and his father died shortly thereafter when Joshua was just seven, leaving the boy to help run the house. He took to the wide-open land and picked up bronco horseback riding, boxing, and wrestling. Haldeman would break in houses for local farmers, often hurting himself in the process, and he organized one of Canada's first rodeos. Family pictures show Joshua dressed in a decorative pair of chaps demonstrating his rope-spinning skills. As a teenager, Haldeman left home to get a degree from the Palmer School of Chiropractic in Iowa and then returned to Saskatchewan to become a farmer.
>
>　When the depression hit in the 1930s, Haldeman fell into a financial crisis. He could not afford to keep up with bank loans on his equipment and had five thousand acres of land seized. "From then on, Dad didn't believe in banks or holding on to money," said Scott Haldeman, who would go on to receive his chiropractic degree from the same school as his father and become one of the world's top spinal pain experts. After losing the farm around 1934, Haldeman lived something of a nomadic existence that his grandson would replicate in Canada decades later. standing six feet, three inches, he did odd jobs as a construction worker and rodeo performer before settling down as a chiropractor."
>
>　By 1948, Haldeman had married a Canadian dance studio instructor, Winnifred Josephine Fletcher, or Wyn, and built a booming chiropractic practice. That year, the family, which already included a son and a daughter, welcomed twin daughters Kaye and Maye, Musk's mother. The children lived in a three story, twenty-room house that included a dance studio to let Wyn keep teaching students. Ever in search of something new to do, Haldeman had picked up flying and bought his won plane. The family gained some measure of notoriety as people heard about Haldeman and his wife packing their kids into the back of the single-engine craft and heading off on excursions all around North America. Haldman would often show up at political and chiropractic meetings in the plane and later wrote a book with his wife called The Flying Haldemans: Pity the Poor Private Pilot.
>
>　Haldeman seemed to have everything going for him when, in 1950, he decided to give it all way. The doctor-cum-politician had long railed against government interference in the lives of individuals and had come to see the Canadian bureaucracy as too meddlesome. A man who forbade swearing, smoking, Coca-Cola, and refined flour at his house, Haldeman contended that the moral character of Canada had started to decline. Haldeman also possessed an enduring lust for adventure. And so, over the course of a few months, the family sold their house and dance and chiropractic practices and decided to move to South Africa - a place Haldeman had never been. Scott Haldeman remembers helping his father disassemble the family's Bellanca Cruisair (1948) airplane and put it into crates before shipping it to Africa. Once in South Africa, the family rebuilt the plane and used it to scour the country for a nice place to live, ultimately settling on Pretoria, where Haldeman set up a new chiropracitc practice.
>
>　The family's spirit for adventure seemed to know no bounds. In 1952, Joshua and Wyn made a 22,000-mile round-trip journey in their plane, flying up through Africa to Scotland and Norway. Wyn served as the navigator and, though not a licensed pilot, would sometimes take over the flying duties. The couple topped this effort in 1954, flying 30,000 miles to Australia and back. Newspapers reported on the couple's trip, and they're believed to be the only private pilots to get from Africa to Australia in a single-engine plane.
>
>　When not up in the air, the Haldemans were out in the bush going on great, monthlong expeditions to find the Lost City of the Kalahari Desert, a supposed abandoned city in southern Africa. A family photo from one of these excursions shows the five children in the middle of the African bush. They have gathered around a large metal pot being warmed by the embers of a campfire. The Children look relaxed as they sit in folding chairs, legs crossed and reading books. Behind them is the ruby-red Bellanca plane, a tent, and a car. The tranquility of the scene belies how dangerous these trips were. During one incident, the family's truck hit a tree stump and forced the bumper through the radiator. Stuck in the middle of nowhere with no means of communication, Joshua worked for three days to fix the truck, while the family hunted for food. At other times, hyenas and leopards would circle the campfire at night, and, one morning, the family woke to find a lion three feet away from their main table. Joshua grabbled the first object he could find - a lamp - waved it, and told the lion to go away. And it did.
>
>　The Haldemans had a laissez-faire approach to raising their children, which would extend over the generations to Musk. Their kids were never punished, as Joshua believed they would intuit their way to proper behavior. When mom and dad went off on their tremendous flights, the kids were left at home. Scott Haldeman can't remember his father setting foot at his school a single time even though his son was captain of the rugby team and a perfect. "To him, that was all just anticipated," said ScottHaldeman. "We were left with the impression that we were capable of anything. You just have to make a decision and do it. In that sense, my father would be very pround of Elon."
>
>　Haldeman died in 1974 at the age of seventy-two. He'd been doing practice landings in his plane and didn't see a wire attached to a pair of poles. The wire caught the plane's wheels and flipped the craft, and Haldman broke his neck. Elon was a toddler at the time. But throughout his childhood, Elon heard many stories about his grandfather's exploits and sat through countless slide shows that documented his travels and trips through the bush. "My grandmother told these tales of how they almost died several times along their journeys," Musk said. "They were flying in a plane with literally no instruments - not even a radio, and they had road maps instead of aerial maps, and some of those weren't even correct. My grandfather had this desire for adventure, exploration doing crazy things." Elon buys into the idea that his unusual tolerance for risk may well have been inherited directly from his grandfather. Many years after the last slide show, Elon tried to find and purchase the red Bellanca plane but could not locate it.
>
>　Maye Musk, Elon's mother, grew up idolizing her parents. In her youth, she was considered a nerd. She liked math and science and did well at the coursework. By the age of fifteen, however, people had taken notice of some of her other attributes. Maye was gorgeous. Tall with ash-blond hair, Maye had the high cheekbones and angular features that would make her stand out anywhere. A friend of the family run a modeling school, and Maye took some courses. On the weekends, she did runway shows, magazine shoots, occasionally showed up at a senator's or ambassador's home for an event, and ended up as a finalist for Miss South Africa. (Maye has continued to model into her sixties, appearing on the covers of magazines like New York and Elle and in Beyonce's music videos.)
>
>　Maye and Elon's mother, Errol Musk, grew up in the same neighorhood. They met for the first time when Maye, born in 1948, was about eleven. Errol was the cool kid to Maye's nerd but had a crush on her for years. "He fell in love with me because of my legs and my teeth," said Maye. The two would date on and off throughout their time at university. And, according to Maye, Errol spent about seven years as a relentless suitor seeking her hand in marriage and eventually breaking her will. "He just never stopped proposing," she said.
>
>　Their marriage was complicated from the start. Maye became pregnant during the couple's honeymoon and gave birth to Elon on June 28, 1971, nine months and two days after her wedding day. While they may not have enjoyed marital bliss, the couple carved out a decent life for themselves in Pretoria. Errol worked as a mechanical and electrical engineer and handled large projects such as office buildings, retail complexes, residential subdivisions, and an air force base, while Maye set up a practice as a dietician. A bit more than a year after Elon's birth came his brother Kimbal, and soon thereafter came their sister Tosca.
>
>　Elon exhibited all the traits of a curious, energetic tot. He picked things up easily, and Maye, like many mothers do, pegged her son as brilliant and precocious. "He seemed to understand things quicker than the other kids," she said. The preplexing thing was that Elon seemed to drift off into a trance at times. People spoke to him, but nothing got through when he had a certain, distant look in his eyes. This happened so often that Elon's parents and doctors thought he might be deaf. "Sometimes, he just didn't hear you," said Maye. Doctors ran a series of tests on Elon, and elected to remove his adenoid glands, which can improve hearing in children. "Well, it didn't change," said Maye. Elon's condition had far more to do with the wiring of his mind than how his auditory system functioned. "He goes into his brain, and then you just see he is in another world," Maye said. "He still does that. Now I just leave him be because I konw he is designing a new rocket or something."
>
>　Other children did not respond well to these dreamlike states. You could do jumping jacks right beside Musk or yell at him, and he would not even notice. He kept right on thinking, and those around him judged that he was either rude or really weird. "I do think Elon was always a little different but in a nerdy way," Maye said, "It didn't endear him to his peers."
>
>　For Musk, these pensive moments were wonderful. At five and six, he had found a way to block out the world and dedicate all of his concentration to a single taks. Part of this ability stemmed from the very visual way in which Musk's mind worked. He could see images in his mind's eye with a clarity and detail that we might associate today with an engineering drawing produced by computer software. "It seems as though the part of the brain that's usually reserved for visual processing - the part that is used to process images coming in from my eyes - gets taken over by internal thought processes," Musk said. "I can't do this as much now because there are so many things demanding my attention but, as a kid, it happened a lot. That large part of your brain that's used to handle incoming images gets used for internal thinking." Computers split their hardest jobs between two types of chips. There are graphics chips that deal with processing the images produced by a television show stream or video game and computational chips that handle general purpose tasks and mathematical operations. Over time, Musk has ended up thinking that his brain has the equivalent of a graphics chip. It allows him to see things out in the world, replicate them in his mind, and imagine how they might change or behave when interacting with other objects. "For images and numbers, I can process their interrelationships and algorighmic relationships," Musk siad. "Acceleration, momentum, kinetic energy - how those sorts of things will be affected by objects comes through very vividly."
>
>　The most striking part of Elon's character as a young boy was his compulsion to read. From a very young age, he seemed to have a book in his hands at all times. "It was not unusual for him to read ten hours a day," said Kimbal. "If it was the weekend, he could go through two books in a day." The family went on numerous shopping excursions in which they realized mid-trip that Elon had gone missing. Maye of Kimbal would pop into the nearest bookstrore and find Elon somewhere near the back sitting on the floor and reading in one of his trancelike states.
>
>　As Elon got older, he would take himself to the bookstore when school ended at 2 P.M and stay there until about 6 P.M., when his parents returned home from work. He plowed through fiction books and then comics and then nonfiction titles. "Some-times they kicked me out of the store, but usually not," Elon said. He listed The Lord of the Rings, Isaac Asimov's Foundation series, and Robert Heinlein's The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress as some of his favorites, alonside The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy. "At one point, I ran out of books to read at the school library and the neighborhood library," Musk said. "This is maybe the third or fourth grade. I tried to convince the librarian to order books for me. So then, I started to read the Encyclopaedia Britannica. That was so helpful. You don't know what you don't know. You realize there are all these things out there."
>
>　Elon, in fact, churned through two sets of encyclopedias - a feat that did little to help make friends. The boy had a photographic memory, and the encyclopedias turned him into a fact factory. He came off as a classic know-it-all. At the dinner table, Tosca would wonder aloud about the distance from Earth to the Moon. Elon would spit out the exact measurement at perigee and apogee. "If we had a question, Tosca would always say, 'Just ask genius boy,'" Maye said. "We could ask him about anything. He just remembered it." Elon cemented his bookworm reputation through his clumsy ways. "He's not very sporty," said Maye.
>
>　Maye tells the story of Elon playing outside one night with his siblings and cousins. When one of them complained of being frightened by the dark, Elon pointed out that "dark is merely the absence of light," which did little to reassure the scared child. As a youngster, Elon's constant yearning to correct people and his abrasive manner put off other kids and added to his feelings of isolation. Elon genuinely thought that people would be happy to hear about the flaws in their thinking. "Kids don't like answers like that," said Maye. "They would say, 'Elon, we are not playing with you anymore.' I felt very sad as a mother because I think he wanted friends. Kimbal and Tosca would bring home friends, and Elon wouldn't, and he would want to play with them. But he was awkward, you know." Maye urged Kimbal and Tosca to include Elon. They responded as kids will. "But Mom, he's not fun." As he got older, however, Elon would have strong, affectionate attachments to his siblings and cousins - his mother's sister's sons. Though he kept to himself at school, Elon had an outgoing nature with members of his family and eventually took on the role of elder and chief instigator among them.
>
>　For a while, life inside the Musk household was quite good. The family owned one of the biggest houses in Pretoria thanks to the success of Errol's engineering business. There's a portrait of the three Musk children taken when Elon was about eight years old that shows three blond, fit children sitting next to each other on a brick porch with Pretoria's famous purple jacaranda trees in the background. Elon has large, rounded cheeks and a broad smile.
>
>　Then, not long after the photo was taken, the family fell apart. His parents separated and divorced within the year. Maye moved with the kids to the family's holiday home in Durban, on South Africa's eastern coast. After a couple of years of this arrangement, Elon decided he wanted to live with his father. "My father seemed sort of sad and lonely, and my mom had three kids, and he didn't have any," Musk said. "It seemed unfair." Some members of Musk's family have bought into this idea that Elon's logical nature propelled him, while others claim that his father's mother, Cora, exerted a lot of pressure on the boy. "I could not understand why he would leave this happy home I made for him - this really happy home," said Maye. "But Elon is his own person." Justine Musk, Elon's ex-wife and the mother of his five boys, theorized that Elon identified more with the alpha male of the house and wasn't bothered by the emotional aspect of the decision. "I don't think he was particularly close with either parent," Justine said, while describing the Musk clan overall as being cool and the opposite of doting. Kimbal later opted to live with Errol as well, saying simply that by nature a son wants to live with his father.
>
>　Whenever the topic of Errol arrives, members of Elon's family clam up. They're in agreement that he is not a pleasant man to be around but have declined to elaborate. Errol has since been remarried, and Elon has two, younger half sisters of whom he's quite protective. Elon and his siblings seem determined not to bad-mouth Errol publicly, so as not to upset the sisters.
>
>　The basics are as follows: Errol's side of the family has deep South African roots. The Musk clan can trace its presence in the country back about two hundred years and claim an entry in Pretoria's first phone book. Errol's father, Walter Henry James Musk, was an army sergeant. "I remember him almost never talking, "Elon said. "He would just drink whiskey and be grumpy and was very good at crossword puzzles." Cora Amelia Musk, Errol's mother, was born in England to a family famed for its intellectual genes. She embraced both the spotlight and her grandchildren. "Our grandmother had this very dominant personality and was quite an anterprising woman," said Kimbal. "She was a very big influence in our lives." Elon considered his relationship with Cora - or Nana, as he called her - particluarly tight. "After the divorce, she took care of me quite a lot," he said. "She would pick me up from school, and I would hang out with her playing Scrabble and that type of thing."
>
>　On the surface, life at Errol's house seemed grand. He had plenty of books for Elon to read from cover to cover and money to buy a computer and other objects that Elon desired. Errol took his children on numerous trips overseas. "It was an amazingly fun time," said Kimbal. "I have a lot of fun memories from that." Errol also impressed the kids with his intellect and dealt out some practical lessons. "He was a talented engineer," Elon said. "He knew how every physical object worked." Both Elon and Kimbal were required to go to the sites of Errol's engineering jobs and learn how to lay bricks, install plumbing, fit windows, and put in electrical wiring. "There were fun moments," Elon said.
>
>　Errol was what Kimbal described as "ultra-present and very intense." He would sit Elon and Kimbal down down and lecture at them for three to four hours without the boys being able to respond. He seemed to delight in being hard on the boys and sucked the fun out of common childhood diversions. From time to time, Elon tried to convince his dad to move to America and often talked about his intentions to live in the United States later in life. Errol countered such dreams by trying to teach Elon a lesson. He sent the housekeepers away and had Elon do all the chores to let him know what it was like "to play American."
>
>　While Elon and Kimbal declined to provide an exact recounting, they clearly experienced something awful and profound during those years with their father. They both talk about having to endure some form of psychological torture. "He definitely has serious chemical stuff," said Kimbal. "Which I am sure Elon and I have inherited. It was a very emotionally challenging upbring-ing, but it made us who we are today." Maye bristled when the subject of Errol came up. "Nobody gets along with him," she said. "He is not nice to anyone. I don't want to tell stories because they are horrendous. You know, you just don't talk about it. There are kids and grandkids involved."
>
>　When asked to chat about Elon, Errol responded via e-mail: "Elon was a very independent and focused child at home with me. He loved computer science before anyone even knew what it was in South Africa and his ability was widely recognized by the time he was 12 years old. Elon and his brother Kimbal's activities as children and young men were so many and varied that it's difficult to name just one, as they travelled together with me extensively in S.Africa and the world at large, visiting all the countinents regularly from the age of six onwards. Elon and his brother and sister were and continue to be exemplary, in every way a father could want. I'm very pround of what Elon's accomplished."
>
>　Errol copied Elon on this e-mail, and Elon warned me off corresponding with his father, insisting that his father's take on past events could not be trusted. "He is an odd duck," Musk said. But, when pressed for more information, Musk dodged. "It would certainly be accurate to say that I did not have a good childhood," he said. "It may sound good. It was not absent of good, but it was not a happy childhood. It was like misery. He's good at making life miserable - that's for sure. He can take any situation no matter how good it is and make it bad. He's not a happy man. I don't know...fuck...I don't know how someone becomes like he is. It would just cause too much trouble to tell you any more." Elon and Justine have vowed that their children will not be allowed to meet Errol.
>
>　When Elon was nearly ten years old, he saw a computer for the first time, at the Sandton City Mall in Johannesburg. "There was an electronics store that mostly did hi-fi-type stuff, but then, in one corner, they started stocking a few computers," Musk said. He felt awed right away - "It was like, Whoa. Holy shit!'" - by this machine that could be programmed to do a person's bidding. "I had to have that and then hounded my father to get the computer," Musk said. Soon he owned a Commodore VIC-20, a popular home machine that went on sale in 1980. Elon's computer arrived with five kilobytes of memory and a workbook on the BASIC programming language. "It was supposed to take like six months to get through all the lessons," Elon said. "I just got super OCD on it and stayed up for three days with no sleep and did the entire thing. It seemed like the most super-compelling thing I had ever seen." Despite being an engineer, Musk's father was something of a Luddite and dismissive of the machine. Elon recounted that "he said it was just for games and that you'd never be able to do real engineering on it. I just said, 'Whatever.'"